
# Community Guidelines for Sustainability of Open-Source Ecosystem

Version 1.0, 2024-12-01

Copyright Naoki Shibata 2024.

This document is licensed under [CC BY-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).


## What is it?

These are non-binding community guidelines intended to be used as a
code of conduct for OSS projects. The guidelines have the following
features.

* The guidelines aim to alleviate burnout problems for OSS developers.
* The guidelines are designed to avoid adding new responsibilities to
  the project maintainer.
* The guidelines are written to be as objective as possible.


## How can I use it in my project?

Please copy
[CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md](https://github.com/shibatch/nofreelunch?tab=coc-ov-file)
into the root directory of your project.  It is distributed under
[CC BY-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).


## Introduction

As the number of individuals from diverse backgrounds participating in
open-source and free software projects continues to grow, an
increasing number of such projects are adopting a code of conduct with
the objective of ensuring that all participants have equal opportunity
to contribute to the project.

A code of conduct is a set of rules that defines the normative
behavior and responsibilities of individuals, parties, and
groups. Typically, they are created for employees of a company in
order to protect the company and to inform employees of the company's
expectations. In general, codes of conduct in OSS projects state
the following items [1][2].

* Respect and welcome diversity.
* Be patient, kind, do the best for the community, be considerate and
  cooperative.
* Condemn sexist/racist language, insults, jokes, violence or threats
  that harass marginalized people.
* Report unacceptable behavior to a specific group of team members who
  usually have the authority to determine appropriate action.


## Problems with existing codes of conduct

However, the issues addressed by these codes of conduct are not
novel. Rather, they are long-standing concerns that have been present
for some time, and these issues have been acknowledged and addressed
to some extent. The recent emergence of these codes is
perplexing. What prompted the introduction of these codes, and what
are the benefits of having a code of conduct? What would be the
consequences of not having one? There are numerous questions that
remain unanswered.

In fact, there are OSS projects that oppose the introduction of such a
code of conduct, and some strong opponents explicitly choose "No Code
of Conduct" for their projects [1][3].

I have the following concerns in introducing a code of conduct to my
project.


### Maintainers are not in a position to punish project members

The most important thing is that the basic human rights of each member
are guaranteed. From the standpoint of guaranteeing freedom of speech,
it is rather better not to have rules or anything like that
restricting speech in non-project related venues. From a
no-punishment-without-law standpoint, the project should not impose
private penalties for offensive comments made by members on social
networking sites that are not related to the project. Even if a
member's non-project-related behavior has been found by an official
agency to be illegal, whether the project should take any action in
response is a matter for careful deliberation. It is the role of the
authorities to punish members for illegal behavior, not the project
maintainers, unless the authorities ask the maintainers to do
something specific. The only thing that members of the project,
including the maintainers, should do is to preserve evidence and to
report any ongoing illegal activity related to the project to the
public authorities.

Even if the code of conduct can restrict some actions of members, it
is only on the web pages related to the project. The mere maintainers
of an OSS project do not have the authority to tell project
participants what to or not to say on social networking sites
unrelated to the project. 

Banning a member in a project should be done out of necessity in order
to defend the project, not to punish the member. Maintainers are not
there to punish members. The idea of secretly telling the maintainer
about the victimization and asking the maintainer to resolve it seems
terribly childish. Maintainers are not the parents of the project
members.


### Maintainers are not experts in resolving disputes between individuals

The resolution of disputes between individuals is often a very
sensitive matter. It is a difficult task just to simply make factual
determinations in cases of suspected illegal activity, and OSS project
maintainers are typically not trained to do such things.

When the person alleging victimization secretly consults with the
maintainer, it is often not easy for the maintainer to respond to that
consultation. For example, if the claim of victimization is not valid,
the maintainer needs to convince the consulter of this. In this
process, if the maintainer inadvertently chooses wrong words, or even
if everything is handled properly, the maintainer could also be
accused of being a perpetrator.

Professional expertise is required in some cases to provide
appropriate consultation, such as when the consulter suffers from a
mental illness. It is not easy for an untrained maintainer to notice
the mental illness, but the maintainer may still need to take
responsibility for any problems that arise as a result of the
consultation.

We should be well aware that people with excellent specialized skills
are novices in fields other than their own. Even in major media
outlets, there are cases where people with specialized skills comment
on issues outside their field of expertise. This is very
disappointing, and comments on issues outside of one's expertise are
often misguided. The correct professional response would be to refuse
to comment on issues outside of one's expertise. It also goes without
saying that we should not ask people with great expertise to do work
that is outside their expertise. Thus, it is not appropriate to name
untrained maintainers as a consultation contact, but rather, it should
be clearly stated that maintainers are not a consultation contact.

Maintainers have no incentive to take their time to resolve disputes
between individuals. The existing codes make the maintainers bear the
cost of ensuring the diversity of the community. It is hard to imagine
that forcing the maintainer to deal with the difficult problem of
resolving disputes between individuals without paying any compensation
would work. If a project member believes that he or she has been
victimized, he or she should not expect the project's consultation
service to function properly, but should seek an official contact
outside the project. Also, if a project truly values the diversity of
its members, it would be more constructive to promote the
establishment of a consultation service for OSS projects by an
organization that can be trusted to some extent. There is no guarantee
that fair decisions will be made in such services, but if trained
experts are consulted, better results can be expected than relying on
novice maintainers. It is also expected that the criteria for judgment
will become relatively uniform. To hire such an expert, however, funds
need to be raised.


### Criteria for identifying violations are not clearly stated

For consulters, it is important to note that the maintainers should
not be trusted unconditionally and there is no guarantee that the
maintainers will side with the consulter. If some rules contain penal
provisions with ambiguous criteria for violation, such provisions can
be arbitrarily administered by decision makers simply to impose
private penalties on members they don't like. And that is often a
reality. To avoid arbitrary enforcement of rules, the criteria for
violation need to be objective.

Maintainers may want to make the rules that allow the maintainers to
make arbitrary decisions to allow for flexible operations in
unpredictable situations. Unfortunately, such rules and their
operation are in fact quite common outside of the Internet. However,
if the maintainers have no intention to make an objective decision
from the beginning, then everything will ultimately be determined by
the likes and dislikes of the maintainers. Members other than the
maintainers have no choice but to trust that the maintainers will make
a fair decision, and there is no difference between having rules and
not having rules.


### The only thing maintainers can do is to ban violators, which is not much of a deterrent to violations

If the violator participates in a project using pseudonyms, it is easy
for the violator to return to the project pretending to be a new
participant after being banned from the project. This has happened
countless times in the past. The "consequences" of banning violators
sounds just ridiculous. Nowadays, it is not uncommon to be banned from
social networking sites for incomprehensible reasons. Since being
banned is the most you can get, such "consequences" are equivalent to
nothing.


Frankly, I cannot help but be surprised that so many prominent OSS
projects have already adopted such codes of conduct that are ambiguous
and of questionable effectiveness.

A quick way to improve community diversity would be to ensure
transparency in all important deliberative processes. However, such an
operation will undoubtedly lead to an increased workload on the
maintainers. I believe that we should start by improving the treatment
of maintainers.


## The reason to create a new code of conduct

If a code of conduct is to be considered a binding contract, it will
be necessary to clarify how it is positioned in relation to the
software distribution license. It would also require a reason to add a
further agreement in addition to the distribution license. It may be
possible to incorporate the code of conduct into the software
distribution license.

On the other hand, it is also possible to make the code of conduct a
non-binding goal of effort, and only aim to get the members to agree
with the philosophy. In this case, the code of conduct could include
the kinds of things that are usually not included in software
distribution licenses, and thus issues that could not be solved by a
software distribution license alone can be addressed.


The specific problem I am having with my project is what is called the
burnout of OSS developers [4, 5, 6, 7], and this is not what is written in
the existing codes of conduct, etc. In OSS projects, software needs to
be maintained continuously, and this requires a continuous effort to
be devoted to the maintenance. This becomes especially evident when
the software being developed in a project becomes large in scale.
However, OSS developers have little or no financial incentive to
continue maintenance and development. Many users of OSS expect the
projects to be maintained for a long period of time, even though they
do not pay a fee. The result is that many OSS developers stop
maintaining projects and developing new features much sooner than
users expect. This may not be a very new problem either, but there is
no established way to solve it.

The Community Guidelines for Sustainability of Open-Source Ecosystem
aim to solve the OSS developers' burnout problem. It sets the goal of
the project members' efforts to promote the awareness that if a
company makes a profit from the commercial use of OSS, they should
contribute to relevant projects. The adoption of the guidelines by a
large number of OSS projects will make the general public at least
aware of the burnout problem of OSS developers.


## To realize actual profit distribution

One reason why companies have not provided substantial financial
support for OSS projects in the past may be because there was no
infrastructure for this purpose. If a company actually wants to
provide financial support to an OSS project, the simplest way is that
the company provides support to each individual contributor. However,
this requires that the company knows the status of the project in
detail. Especially if the project is dependent on other projects, a
very large number of contributors can be candidates for support. It
may be too complicated for each company to evaluate a large number of
contributors and determine the amount of support for each.

If companies provide bulk support to each project or a set of related
projects, it will be necessary to establish criteria for fair and
objective distribution of funds among and within projects. This
requires an objective and fair method of evaluating each member's
contribution to the project. For example, if the contribution of each
member is simply evaluated by the number of lines of source code
rewritten, this is hardly fair and will lead to rampant and
meaningless rewriting of source code, resulting in many complaints
from project contributors. Objective evaluation of contributions is
not simple and requires academic research. At first glance, the
construction of such an evaluation method seems not easy.

I expect that as firms offering the above services emerge and compete
with each other, capitalist mechanisms will optimize the criteria for
the distribution of funds. In this scenario, several firms offering
the above services will first emerge. Each of these firms will
implement different distribution criteria for funds and publish those
criteria. The firms will then start services to distribute the funds
according to their criteria after charging a fee. Each OSS project
designates the firm it considers to have the best criteria when it
receives the funds. Firms that implement better criteria and services
will earn more fee income as they are used more often. In this way,
the criteria for distribution of funds are optimized by capitalism.
Also, public disclosure of the amount of support for projects by each
company using OSS would give a promotional meaning to the company's
support for OSS projects. This would be expected to stimulate more
support for OSS projects.

In any case, the first step is to make it commonplace that companies
that use OSS provide financial support to OSS projects. Then, firms
that provide the above services would start to emerge.


## Regarding accounting for the payments

If a company provides financial support for a project as a donation,
various restrictions may arise in some countries.

Here we consider the case where a company does not make a donation to
a project, but instead enters into an agreement to contract out the
development to an individual developer. Under this arrangement, the
company would spend the funds under a category such as "research and
development expenses." However, the contract would have to be for some
large, collective modification to the software. In addition, since it
is not known whether the development will succeed or not in advance,
it becomes troublesome to make agreements related to the development
process, such as the establishment of the purpose of development.

One way to avoid this complication is to have the company pay for the
management and operation of the CI system operated by the project. In
this method, the maintainers and developers involved in the project
jointly manage and operate the CI system, and the project requires the
use of this CI system when committing the code as a project policy.
In this way, the fee for the use of this CI system can be set up as
financial support for the project from the company. This usage price
can be set freely according to the situation, independent of the
frequency of use of the CI system.

One of the advantages of adopting the method in which companies pay
for the management and operation of CI systems is that it is clear
from the beginning that the purpose of paying fees is for the
management and operation of CI systems, and there are no complications
in making agreements regarding the implementation of the contract.
Since there is relatively little need to add value to the CI system by
newly modifying its functionality, and the benefits to be gained by
entering into a contract are clear from the start, the contract can be
simple and straightforward. In addition, unlike methods such as
selling advertising space on a project's website, it is possible to
set the price as a discretionary price, and this has the advantage of
allowing the price to be set freely.

In general, companies tend to avoid signing contracts directly with
individuals. Therefore, it may be easier for companies to pay usage
fees for CI systems to some legal entity, and then that entity pays
the fees to the maintainer and developer. In this scheme, the
maintainer and developer sign an agreement for the management of the
CI system with this entity and receive a fee from this entity.
Alternatively, the maintainer and developer may become employees of
the entity and receive fees in the form of salaries. This legal entity
may be a corporation established by the maintainer and
developer. Services provided by an outside vendor may also be used for
the payments in this scheme. Depending on the form of the contract,
default may occur if the management and operation of the CI system is
not successful. Default will almost never occur if the payment for the
management and operation of the CI system is made in the form of
deferred payment after the contract period is over, and the contract
is renewed every month. In addition, various tax-saving measures can
be taken with this scheme, but these are not discussed here because
circumstances differ from country to country.


## Acknowledgement

I thank Mr. Eiji Ito for his expertise and assistance in writing this
document.


## References

[1] Tourani, Parastou, Bram Adams, and Alexander Serebrenik. "Code of
conduct in open source projects." 2017 IEEE 24th international
conference on software analysis, evolution and reengineering
(SANER). IEEE, 2017.

[2] [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code of conduct](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code of conduct>)

[3] https://github.com/domgetter/NCoC

[4] https://www.businessinsider.com/open-source-developers-burnout-low-pay-internet-2022-3

[5] https://trstringer.com/oss-compensation-broken/

[6] https://www.vice.com/en/article/43zak3/the-internet-was-built-on-the-free-labor-of-open-source-developers-is-that-sustainable

[7] https://staltz.com/software-below-the-poverty-line.html
